---
title: [Draft] ME 759 (High Performance Computing for Eningeering Applications) Quickstart Guide
date: 2023-12-31 12:00:00 -500
categories: [tutorial,software]
tags: [c++,vscode,cuda,linux,install,software]
---

This tutorial is for students wanting to take ME 759 but didn't have the prerequisite of ME 459 and who maybe aren't that familiar with Linux, Git, C++, etc. This tutorial is essentially what I wish I had to save me a lot of headaches in the beginning of the course.

**Please** use the comments section to inform me of any corrections I need to make. Much of this is from memory as I don't have the time to test a lot of this.

# Required Materials
* a computer with a NVIDIA Graphics Card
    * Apple computers typically lack this
    * This tutorial assumes you have Windows installed, but if you have Linux installed, I'm sure you can figure things out. 

# Setting up VSCODE
We will be using vscode as our IDE and not visual basic or whatever else you're used to using. The reason is because vscode works very well with NVIDIA's NSIGHT debugging tool and also because vscode will eventually rule supreme <https://pypl.github.io/IDE.html>.
1. Download vscode here: <https://code.visualstudio.com/> 
2. Install vscode
3. launch vscode by either 
# Setting up WSL
While you can compile all your C++ code via a Windows compiler, it's just way cleaner if you do everything through Linux. But have no fear, you don't need to dual boot or use a virtual machine. WSL (technically WSL 2) allows you to use a Linux shell from Windows and share all the same files that are on your computer.
1. 
# Setting up Gitlab/Git
1. create a repos folder
2. 
# Linux Tips
# C++ Tips
# Euler Tips
# Debugging C++
# Installing CUDA
# Debugging CUDA